The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
This show will be an interview with science fiction author Joan D. Venge.
Joan Venge is one of the best of the group of young science fiction authors that appeared in
the 70s. Her first story, Ten Soldier, was published in 1974 and since then she's written two novels
and a number of novellas and short stories. In 1977 she received a Hugo Award for one of her
stories Eyes of Amber. She has experimented convincingly with a future history and with
world-building and is noted for her credible and fascinating aliens. Perhaps most readers though
respond most strongly to her characters. They are vividly and realistically drawn, easily
identified with and they remain with the reader long after he's finished one of her stories.
How did you get started writing science fiction?
Well, there are sort of two versions of that in a way. There's my my official writing career,
which began after I first got married to Werner Venge, my now ex-husband. He was a science fiction
writer at the time and I had been a person who fooled around with writing for a while before
that. I would just dintle around him that I used to want to be an artist and writing was just
something I did kind of privately and never showed to anybody and rarely finished anything either.
But Werner encouraged me to take it seriously if I was going to write. By that time I had
abandoned wanting to be an artist because my college art professors had ruined my desire to do art
and I was sort of casting about and and he knew that I like to write and so he encouraged me to
attempt to take it seriously and sit down and do something and finish it. And so I decided that I
would take him up on that and I started doing a story which turned out to be the first story that
I sold. It was called Tin Soldier and when I started writing it I didn't know if I'd ever get it
finished or anything but I did get it finished and I showed it to him and he said he thought it was
available and so I started sending it out and I did sell it and after that it was hooked of course
I wanted to go on being a writer. Does your background in anthropology have much influence on your writing?
Well actually it does play a pretty big role in the writing because I well I find that anthropology
and science fiction have a lot of things that are common for me. Archaeology was my specialty and
archaeology is the anthropology of the past and science fiction for me is the anthropology of the
future. They form sort of a long continuum and they both the thing I like about both science
fiction and anthropology is that they they allow you to see how other people do things and that
other people's lives are not led the same way yours is and that there are other ways of coping
that aren't necessarily the ones you've always known that other people do things differently
and get along perfectly well that way and I love the the way that both anthropology and
science fiction can take your preconceptions and kind of turn them around 180 degrees and make
you say gee I never thought of it like that before but specifically I like to use my anthropological
background too when I'm setting up societies for the stories that I'm going to write. I do sort of
an ethnography which is a cultural study only I have to make up the details of the culture in
general instead of just studying an anthropological culture. I do get a lot of details bits and pieces
of interesting societies which I recombine sometimes to create science fiction societies.
It just it gives you a way of thinking I think that's very useful when you're writing a science
fiction story looking for different ways you know hoping that that's when when you send your
rocket ship out into the galaxy it's not going to come to a planet that where everyone acts like
1950s earth you know I really enjoy exploring differences in societies things like that
and well mythology is kind of an offshoot of anthropology that I find is very useful
to science fiction too. I get a lot of story ideas from mythology and a lot of
I think just kind of underlying strengths that are almost like fantasy and I like to weave them
into the science fiction which is what I most like to write and I think it gives them a stronger
appeal. Could that be because we have sort of a common background of folktales and myths
and by weaving these in your stories you sort of reinforce or update some of the old basic
stories that our culture is based on. Right yeah I think very much so I think there really are
certain universalities and it's too which kind of strike everybody in a very deep and basic level
and if you could capture some of that same feeling in a story when you write it maybe by
employing elements consciously or unconsciously of you know out of mythology I think that you could
really have a very deep emotional impact on the reader which I think is probably what every
writer would like to do. I've noticed that a lot of your stories seem to have a happy ending could
that be because some of them have their basis in folktales or is it because you're just basically
an optimistic person? I think it's more than I'm basically an optimistic person uh actually not
not every single one of my stories is based on folktales a lot of them do have those elements
in them but some some don't it's just that I really I hate to leave a story feeling totally
depressed by it and so I think I hate to write a story that's totally depressing frequently
I think the stories have sort of bittersweet endings or you know people don't walk off hand
into the sunset they're usually dragging along you know a few suitcases full of problems too
but you know I think the way life is it's unrealistic usually to write a totally happy ending
but I do like to have an optimistic ending when I when I read things I I relate to them on a very
personal level I get very involved in the story and if it's a story the end result of which is to
feel totally depressed and feel like you know why bother to live I really don't like being left
feeling that way and I think I don't like feeling that way when I write too. Yes uh it seems you get
very involved with your characters that you create is is it because you flesh them out so well when
you create them or is it because the characters are sort of variations on yourself? Well uh
I think probably some of both I think a lot of my favorite characters are
you know bits and pieces of me I don't know that any one of them is all me I think all people have
have different aspects of their personality which which are come to the fore at different times
just in their day-to-day life and I think when you're writing you can't help but
inject those personalities into characters I really do like characters in the stories
I like to read about characters who seem real and so I like to try and make my own characters
as real as possible when I write them and I think you know by getting inside their heads I
invariably you know stick a few of my thoughts in there I do have some characters who are
based on other people I know and things like that too but I do like to um I like to you know well
when I write about strange things and new ideas in different societies I like to put people who
recognizeably human even if they're aliens I suppose but uh people that that the reader can
relate to into those situations and let the reader see how the human being reacts to the strange set
of circumstances it's not simply the strange set of circumstances which interests me although that's
I think why I like science fiction because I like I don't like to write about the same old day-to-day
thing I like to explore new ground but I like to do it with actual characters who you come as close
as possible to see me like real people I like to see what they do in given circumstances
yes science fiction is the only literature which allows you to explore the future
which opens up quite a few vistas that mainstream literature just doesn't have
right and that's really what I like about science fiction I think I read my first science fiction
book when I was in ninth grade and I just felt like you know boy where has this been all my life
I just swept away by it and I felt like I really hardly wanted to read anything but science fiction
after that it was just it was just so exciting to me to know that these new worlds opened up to me
yes I remember one of the characters in eyes of amber is a singer a songwriter and it seems like
music plays an important role in your writing yes it really does actually I I seem to relate to
music on the kind of supplemental level I guess it's something like operate something like mythology
for me when I hear a song I I frequently get down into the song and start wondering what's going on
in the background of it you know the situation is set up in the song leads me to think well who are
the people involved in this and and how did they get here and what is this talking about actually
I tend to relate to songs in a very personal way that they they have a kind of reality about them
is that I frequently can't help thinking that that the songwriter must have written that about his
or her own experience even though I know it's no more likely that they did and that someone writing
fiction necessarily wrote a story about their own life but I just I just enjoy music tremendously
and it really stimulates creative juices for me so I frequently do wind up being inspired to
write certain things by by listening to music in fact eyes of amber the the title of that story
is taken from the song by Buffy St. Marie which is about someone who knows a demon lover and
sort of fit into the context of the story where the alien woman thinks of of the space probe as
as a demon and she relates to it because it does respond to her although she doesn't know what's
the human being on earth she relates to it as another being and this is kind of a fascination
for it and it's just taking little elements like that and working with interest and race
and it's one of the pleasures of writing for me since you do have a rather good background in
anthropology uh how do you go about constructing your aliens oh that's an interesting question
actually uh I don't think I have any any particular method for constructing aliens they
they frequently kind of arise out of other givens in the situation and out of the environment
in eyes of amber the the aliens although they they seem superficially humanoid we're actually
constructed for an entirely different nitrogen breathing
uh in this situation on a world than one of the in one of the moons of saturn world which was
extremely cold and uh they were tri-supiens which meant that they they spent part of the time with
the sky part of the land and part in the water uh the creatures in crystal ship were sort of marsupial
like and uh the creatures and my story to bell the cat thrived on radiation they just lived on
pure radiation they they lived in essentially a uh a hot you know incredibly radioactively hot swamp
on a planet uh hidden away in a cave but there's actually no real pattern to any of them the the
creatures living in the cave came out of the idea of there being essentially natural nuclear
reactors uh forming on the earth or there's an article somewhere about uh how there seemed to be
the fossil remains of one somewhere in Africa I think seemed that at some point uh a concentration
of ore had gotten so so radioactively hot that it had actually started uh a thermo nuclear reaction
not a bomb but just a kind of a a roiling boiling situation and so I had these creatures that it
told from whole planets like that and it'd been shipwrecked essentially on this uh planets which
would be normal to human beings and they had had managed to find this spot and take refuge in it
and it was just uh you know it came out of trying to think of what sort of creatures would live in
that environment uh I suppose I unless the general start with the environment and then try to think
about what sort of adaptations would be necessary to it I don't know the the aliens are are one of
those things that just sort of spring out of the unconscious I guess I don't I don't really have
the pattern for creating them uh except that I start with certain givens of the of the culture
what are the problems with creating aliens is that if you if you make them too alien then the reader
can't understand them or relate to them and they just seem to be essentially nonsensical
it's very difficult to try to convey a feeling of alienness and yet something that
that a human being can still relate to and not simply say uh you know what is this a junk I don't
understand this stop reading look a lot of science fiction writers have talked about that there's
our frequently accusations about well you know the aliens are not really alien enough but then you
come down to the old bottom line that if they are alien enough even if a if one human being can
imagine something that alien someone else we don't understand it so you're always caught in the mind
when you're writing about aliens. In To Bell the Cat you've created one of the most alien aliens
I've ever encountered the being as I understand it uh is in two parts uh the intelligence is located
deep in a cave and uh it controls its mobile parts the little creatures uh and all other parts of
the cave and out on the surface but but its thought processes are amazing how did you come up with this idea?
This reminds me of a story about Robert Browning when a woman asked him one time what one of his
poems meant and he said, matter when I wrote that only God and I knew what it meant and now only God knows
I can't actually remember how I came up with that idea it's terrible I don't know whether it's in my
notes anywhere or not um I think it must have grown kind of grown out of the idea of specialization
in animals where you know um a human being is is biologically speaking a very un-specialized
creature because it has fingernails which are the most primitive form of thing as opposed to a claw
or hoof which are which are um adaptations you know specializations of nails and um you know
there are various other things about the human body which are uh quote primitive biologically
and I I guess I may have been thinking about uh specialization developing to an extreme where
actual different uh parts of the body became separate entities and they were all controlled
by the mind which stayed in one spot some of the specialized parts were particularly strong and
some were particularly agile things like that and they could be sent out kind of far ranging and
controlled telepathically by the brain which just stayed at home in safety and uh said there were
essentially two levels of organism which made up one creature one and then the the um the specialized
creatures that the that the brain controlled had no particular brain of their own sort of a
a rudimentary receiver so then it could send them into commands and it could receive back from
various impressions of what they were doing I I wound up the way they communicate became sort of
like writing poetry for me I used to like direct poetry and this came as close to million as I had
for a long time and then while the the brain creatures were communicating with each other
with the other brains and discussing their plight they were at the same time receiving input and
sending directions to all their mobiles their little specialized parts that were moving around
in the radioactive muck and uh so you would get their their basic commentary and then all the
levels below that of interaction and I I really enjoyed writing about that I I thought it was
quite quite exciting when I was doing it but the trouble is that I think I only found one person
who who actually understood without having it explained to them what was going on in that
story I wasn't sure what I understood and I felt like that was the case where my aliens had got
two aliens for their own good you've undertaken another difficult writing task uh that being
world building in your novel the snow queen it's a it's a wonderful work of science fantasy uh you
would call it science fantasy wouldn't you um I suppose so actually uh it it is you know in
its heart it's a science fiction story but it does have heavy mythological elements which I think
give it a fantasy like quality and I I wasn't fighting that at all I was I was striving for a
sort of fiction oh good well then I can call it a wonderful work of science fantasy it's got a very
involved plot and a very exciting narrative uh this must have taken a tremendous amount of
background development yes probably um oh gosh that that book was it was quite an incredible
thing for me to write that book because I wound up being about it was over 600 pages of manuscript
it's almost 200 000 words long and um when I started writing it I had never written a complete
novel all at once I'm with outcast of heaven delta I had written the novella and then I had
um increased in size to have a novel and I was feeling kind of daunted about the very idea of
of writing a normal what I thought would be a normal length novel about 200 pages um so but I
thought I finally did sit down and start to write it and the the more I wrote the more I realized
that it was not going to stop at 200 pages I think I had you've gotten through 100 pages and realized
that I had barely gotten into the plot at all my writing and from then on I could only just go on
and write and write and write and see where it led me it got more and more complicated as it went
along until I really disparate at times that I would ever be able to finish the thing it was a
great comfort to me when I finally sat down and figured out how everything had to fit together
it gets to the end of the book uh okay I did well I did a fair amount of background work beforehand
but actually I wound up doing a great deal of the work I think during the process of writing the
book I had I conceived of the idea of the of the the wicked city of carbuncle which gets its name
because it's either a jewel or a fester depending on your point of view but I wanted it to be sort of
a place where all kinds of cultures from all kinds of worlds came together and and mixed and
mingled and um and trying to make a portrait of the city I needed a lot of different characters with
a lot of different backgrounds behind them and so I I um I would I would whenever I needed a new
character I would write one into the story and then I come have to figure out where they came from
um I was frequently I don't lay everything out before I actually start to write a book I have
kind of a basic structure which I think it was being sort of like a trellis and then the story is
a line that grows up through it and fills it in and flushes it out and things and um I think because
I didn't have any idea of how big the snow queen was going to be it got even more complex you know
in in the process than most of the things most of the things I have a clearer idea ahead of time
of what they're going to be about but it was just so massive it was impossible to think about
everything ahead of time it was mostly the scientific research I think that I did ahead of time and
reading up on black holes and things like that I um I regret that black holes and clones became
such kind of stereotypes during the time which are a beautiful book they work they were not quite
such archetypal sci-fi cliches when I started writing the book as they are now but um at least
since I hope the book will appeal to a wide audience at least um maybe people who don't even
regularly read science fiction will know what I'm talking about and I'm talking about black holes
and clones at this point but I did um I did do a fair amount of of technical reading or
semi-technical reading on the nature of black holes and using them as means of travel in order to
to set up the you know the basic science fictional premises of the book and I did I happened to read
Robert Graves book the white goddess just before I started writing the snow queen and that
I found that influenced me heavily and that I got a lot of of the the mythical fantasy type elements
out of that and kind of wove them into the texture texture of the book and um and I tried to create
societies which would kind of fit in with the most technical and non-technical societies which would
fit comfortably with with kind of the underlying themes and premises of the book and from there I
just uh things just grow like topsy I can't say one of the characters who comes from a very advanced
society the most technically uh technologically dominant society in the book started out as a
walk-on character his name is Gundelino and he came along with uh one of the major characters of the
book in the scene and he just started acting up and out of his personality I I kind of saw a whole
cultural stereotype growing and I realized part of actually part of where he came from was I had
been reading a lot of books about I've been reading some fiction books about Romans and Britain because
I've always been fascinated by Romans and Britain as part of the archaeology thing I guess and just
the kind of fascination with the it was it was the sort of science fictional reversal where
um you know the uh you know the the highly cultured people are are the people who too often wind up
in certain sorcery fantasies you know the kind of dark and swarthy people and they're you know
they're usually spouting around in the bushes but they were the people who were swab sophisticated
and on top and the people with red hair and freckles and green eyes were were running around
like howling barbarians in the brush and I thought that was a delightful twist but um just thinking
about this about cultural arrogance and how the Romans sort of uh resembled Victorian English in
that way I I just got into a mindset to write about that sort of character I think and so
you know without even realizing it this particular character just began taking on all these aspects
and out of him I realized what his whole culture must be like and it became one of the important
societies in the book and um I just our odd little things happened like that this whole book
kind of grew up in a strange way it was quite an indescribable thing and if I had known ahead of
time when I was getting into I would never have started it probably just as well that we can't
see the future I think. Oh yes um correct me if I'm wrong but didn't I read somewhere that your
story is based upon the hands Christian Anderson fairytale call The Snow Queen? Oh yes it is as
a matter of fact that was my original inspiration for the book um there's a a cartoon and an animated
movie of The Snow Queen which they occasionally show on television if you can wait through 15
minutes of art link letter talking to children at the beginning of it it's really quite well done
um I was interested in it you know I had first seen that movie when I was in about eighth grade
and oh this is silly but when I saw it again uh back during the 70s sometime I I realized what
an interesting fairytale it is um it's most fairytale the thing about most fairytales is that they
are frequently degenerate mythology and if you know uh any particular amount about Near Eastern
and European mythology you see a lot of symbolic archetypes you see ravens and stags and and
wicked stepmother and the sweet young innocence and things like that which um you know they they
all actually have their archetypes back in in in European and Near Eastern mythology and that
well that just as an aside that was why um the Robert Graves book on the on the white goddess and
on on all that mythology in Europe and the Near East fit in so perfectly with this particular
story and Hans Christian Anderson had written down but was essentially one of these old tales
which are kind of twisted up mythology and the thing that interested me especially about this
particular tale was that there was no prince in it um that's usually prince who gets to do all the
fun and exciting things like fighting the dragons and things like that and waking up to the sleeping
maiden and the and the women in the story are usually either the wicked old witch or um some
helpless simplaring creature and um you know I get sort of bored with that kind of thing but I was
very interested this book was quite a twist because or this fairytale was quite a twist because
all the all the main roles in it were played by women uh the basic idea of the story is that
they're a little girl and a little boy who are friends and the little boy is still on way by the
Snow Queen who is kind of an elemental goddess of winter and most of the story concerns the little
girl's um travels as she's searching for him and all the people she meets and the people she meets are
uh all virtually all female and the people in positions of power in the story are women
and I thought I thought that was quite interesting and unique and I was in the mood to do a story
in which major women played major roles in the book and um so I thought that was a good jumping
off point for it and uh so I you know from there everything else just started growing basically
I read Robert Graves book and I said boy this gives me a lot more fuel for the fire and I just
started writing at that point I didn't I didn't want to write a fantasy though I didn't want to
just make it a retelling of the fairytale basically I really wanted it to be a whole new story and I
wanted it to be science fiction as well because that's just the way my brain works I guess I have
written a couple of fantasy stories recently you know I've always enjoyed reading fantasy as well
as science fiction but so far the majority of my work has been at least technically science fiction
so
author critic and editor Ben Bova has praised Joan Venge for blending
believable science with believable characters no easy task the best way to know and appreciate
Joan Venge is to buy one of her books and start reading for those who do there should be no
disappointments this is David Cruz and David Carson this has been the science fiction radio show
a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCVFM
and Odessa College Odessa Texas